Refactored explainer to include 'static' version (#1)
WebAssembly/js-promise-integration: proposals/js-promise-integration/Overview.md

}

[LegacyNamespace=WebAssembly, Exposed=(Window,Worker)]
interface Suspender {
   constructor();
   WebAssembly.Function suspendOnReturnedPromise(Function func);
   Function returnPromiseOnSuspend(WebAssembly.Function func);
}
```

The core concept embodied here is that an exported function and any imported function that is called eventaully from that exported function form a bracketed pair. 

In order to accomodate asynchronous external functions (aka `Promise` returning functions) any `Promise` value returned by the import is immediately propagated out through the export. Any pending computation is suspended and 'packaged up' in the returned `Promise`. This pending computation will be resumed when the `Promise` is fulfilled.

The bracketing of the exports and the imports is achieved using a combination of function wrappers and shared `Suspender` objects. 

## Example

There are two expected patterns of use: where a single `Suspender` statically connects exports to imports; and where the connection is established dynamically. Since it is simpler, we will give an example of the first approach here.

> It is useful to consider WebAssembly modules to conceputally have "synchronous" and "asynchronous" imports and exports. A primary goal for this API is to enable WebAssembly modules that expect synchronous imports to be connected to implementations that are asynchronous. We achieve this by wrapping both the exports and the imports with functions that mediate between the two worlds. Wrapped exports and imports are connected with a shared Suspender object to facilitate both implementation and composability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is useful to consider WebAssembly modules to conceputally have "synchronous" and "asynchronous" imports and exports. A primary goal for this API is to enable WebAssembly modules that expect synchronous imports to be connected to implementations that are asynchronous. We achieve this by wrapping both the exports and the imports with functions that mediate between the two worlds. Wrapped exports and imports are connected with a shared `Suspender` object to facilitate both implementation and composability.
```

});
```

> In this example, we have a WebAssembly module that is a very simple state machine&mdash; driven from JavaScript. Whenever the JavaScript client code wishes to update the state, it invokes the exported `update_state` function. In turn, the WebAssembly `update_state` function calls an import – `compute_delta` – to compute a delta to add to the state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we have a WebAssembly module that is a very simple state machine—driven from JavaScript. Whenever the JavaScript client code wishes to update the state, it invokes the exported `update_state` function. In turn, the WebAssembly `update_state` function calls an import, `compute_delta`, to compute a delta to add to the state.
```

On the JavaScript side, though, the function we want to use for computing the delta turns out to need to be run asynchronously; that is, it returns a `Promise` of a `Number` rather than a `Number` itself.

We can bridge this synchrony gap by bracketing the exported `update_state` function and the imported `compute_delta` function using a common `suspender` and wrapping the functions.

> The `suspender.returnPromiseOnSuspend` function takes a function as argument – in this case `update_state` – and wraps it into a new function; which will be the function actually used by JavaScript code. The new function invokes the wrapped function: calls it with the same arguments and returns the same results. The difference shows up if the inner function ever suspends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `suspender.returnPromiseOnSuspend` function takes a function as argument—in this case `update_state`—and wraps it into a new function, which will be the function actually used by JavaScript code. The new function invokes the wrapped function, i.e. calls it with the same arguments and returns the same results. The difference shows up if the inner function ever suspends.
```

> The `suspender.suspendOnReturnedPromise` function also takes a function as argument: – `compute_delta` which was the original imported function. When it is called, the wrapped function calls `compute_delta` and inspects the returned result. If that result is a `Promise` then, instead of returning that `Promise` to the WebAssembly module, suspends the computation instead and `update_state` will return with an updated `Promise`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `suspender.suspendOnReturnedPromise` function also takes a function as argument: `compute_delta`—the original imported function. When it is called, the wrapper calls `compute_delta` and inspects the returned result. If that result is a `Promise` then, instead of returning that `Promise` to the WebAssembly module, the wrapper suspends `suspender`'s WebAssembly computation instead.
```

> The result is that the `Promise` returned by the `compute_delta` is propagated out immediately to the export and the updated version returned by `update_state`. The update here refers to the capture of the suspended computation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result is that the `suspender.returnPromiseOnSuspend`-ed export that called `suspender.suspendOnReturnedPromise(compute_delta)` will return a `Promise` that will resolve once `compute_delta`'s returned `Promise` resolves and the resumed WebAssembly export returns a value.
```

Author: I prefer my version of this. Will look at combining the two.

> At some point, the original `Promise` created by `compute_delta` will be resolved – when the file `data.txt` has been loaded and parsed. At that point, the suspended computation will be resumed with the value read from the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At some point, the original `Promise` created by `compute_delta` will be resolved, i.e. when the file `data.txt` has been loaded and parsed. At that point, the suspended computation will be resumed with the value read from the file.
```

It is important to note that the WebAssembly program itself is not aware of having been suspended. From the perspective of the `update_state` function itself, it called an import, got the result and carried on. There has been no change to the WebAssembly code during this process.

> Similarly, we are not changing the normal flow of the JavaScript code: it is not suspended except in the normally expected ways – due to the `Promise` returned by `compute_delta`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, we are not changing the normal flow of the JavaScript code: it is not suspended except in the normally expected ways, e.g. the `Promise` returned by `compute_delta`.
```

Bracketing the exports and imports like this is strongly analagous to adding an `async` marker to the export, and the wrapping of the import is essentially adding an `await` marker, but unlike JavaScript we do not have to explicitly thread `async`/`await` all the way through all the intermediate WebAssembly functions!

> Notice that we did not wrap the `init_state` import, nor did we wrap the exported `get_state` function. These functions will continue to behave as they would normally: `init_state` will return with whatever value the JavaScript code gives it – `2.71` in our case – and `get_state` can be used by any JavaScript code to get the current state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that we did not wrap the `init_state` import, nor did we wrap the exported `get_state` function. These functions will continue to behave as they would normally: `init_state` will return with whatever value the JavaScript code gives it—`2.71` in our case—and `get_state` can be used by any JavaScript code to get the current state.
```

> This example uses a shared `Suspender` object that is fixed before the WebAssembly module itself is created. This is simple to use; but has some disadvantages. The primary limitation is that, because the `Suspender` is fixed, it is not possible to support any form of reentrancy of the WebAssembly module; other than that we have just seen with non-wrapped exports and imports. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example uses a shared `Suspender` object that is fixed before the WebAssembly module itself is created. This is simple to use; but has some disadvantages. The primary limitation is that, because the `Suspender` is fixed, it is not possible to support any form of reentrancy of the WebAssembly module, other than what we have just seen with non-wrapped exports and imports. In particular, only one computation can be "inside" a given `Suspender` at a time—whether suspended or active—which means this approach cannot support multiple concurrent computations within the wrapped WebAssembly exports.
```

> Instead of associating exports and imports with a `Suspender` object the is fixed at instantiation time, we can parameterize the wrapped exports & imports with a `Suspender` – in addition to any other arguments they would have. This involves using the static versions of the `returnPromiseOnSuspend` and  `suspendOnReturnedPromise` functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of associating exports and imports with a `Suspender` object that is fixed at instantiation time, one can parameterize the wrapped exports & imports with a `Suspender`, in addition to any other arguments they would normally have. This involves using the static versions of the `returnPromiseOnSuspend` and  `suspendOnReturnedPromise` functions we add to the `WebAssembly` namespace.
```

> When a wrapped export is invoked it is given the Suspender to use for that invocation. That Suspender is also used when invoking the wrapped import function. This involves communicating the Suspender object received by the export function into the appropriate imports that that export invokes. This is typically more difficult to achieve without good tooling support when generating the WebAssembly module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a wrapped export is invoked it is given the `Suspender` to use for that invocation. That `Suspender` is also used when invoking the wrapped import function. This involves communicating the `Suspender` object received by the export function through to the appropriate imports that that export invokes. This is typically more difficult to achieve without good tooling support when generating the WebAssembly module.
```

* **Active**[`caller`] - control is inside the `Suspender`, with `caller` being the function that called into the `Suspender` and is expecting an `externref` to be returned
* **Suspended** - currently waiting for some promise to resolve

We separate the specifications of the `Suspender` interface and the static `suspendOnPromise` and `returnPromiseOnSuspend` functions.

The method `suspender.returnPromiseOnSuspend(func)` asserts that `func` is a `WebAssembly.Function` with a function type of the form `[ti*] -> [to]` and then returns a `Function` with implicit function type `[ti*] -> [externref]` that does the following when called with arguments `args`:

1. Traps if `suspender`'s state is not **Inactive**
2. Changes `suspender`'s state to **Active**[`caller`] (where `caller` is the current caller)
3. Lets `result` be the result of calling `func(args)` (or any trap or thrown exception)
4. Asserts that `suspender`'s state is **Active**[`caller'`] for some `caller'` (should be guaranteed, though the caller might have changed)
5. Changes `suspender`'s state to **Inactive**
6. Returns (or rethrows) `result` to `caller'`

> Note that the `returnPromiseOnSuspend` method takes a `WebAssembly.Function` as argument, yet returns a `Function` value. This reflects the constraint that this API may only be used to integrate WebAssembly computations within a JavaScript environment. If the argument is not a `WebAssembly.Function`, or if that entity does not actually contain a WebAssembly function, then a `TypeError` exception is thrown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the `Suspender.returnPromiseOnSuspend` method takes a `WebAssembly.Function` as argument, yet returns a `Function` value. This reflects the constraint that this API may only be used to integrate WebAssembly computations within a JavaScript environment. If the argument is not a `WebAssembly.Function`, or if that entity does not actually contain a WebAssembly function, then a `TypeError` exception is thrown.
```
